[rl] add window FIFO scheduling (#3927)
pytorch/torchtitan: torchtitan/experiments/rl/docs/windowed_fifo.md

> # Windowed FIFO offpolicy bound

Reviewer: we should start with citing Minimax

The asynchronous controller limits rollout staleness with an active buffer and an anchored FIFO window. Define:

- `S`: target offpolicy steps
- `P`: prompt groups consumed per train step
- `B = (S + 1) * P`: active buffer size
- `W`: FIFO window size; `W = 1` is strict FIFO

Consider a target prompt group `g` sampled at policy version `v`:

```text
older groups                                  younger groups
[ 0 ][ 1 ] ... [ g-1 ][ g ][ g+1 ] ... [ g+W-1 ]
                       ^    at most W-1 prompt groups can bypass g
                       target sampled at policy v
```

At most `B - 1` older active groups can be ahead of `g`. Because the window is anchored at the oldest remaining group, only the next `W - 1` younger groups can bypass `g`. A group farther right cannot enter the window before `g` is consumed.

Therefore, at most

```text
(B - 1) + (W - 1) = B + W - 2

> ```

Reviewer: i think that this will require a lot of reasoning from someone not familiar with the algorithm. A better path would be to
a. first introduce strict FIFO
b. Share the problem with stalling and greedy
c. Then say: We can find a solution in between by buying some extra time for the stalling group to finish, at the cost of that particular group becoming older. We do it, because, otherwise, our only other options are:
1. stall
2. greedy drop
3. increase the target off policiness for all samples -- we dont want to unneessaraily do that. We want to allow one very slow ones to be a bit older.

Author: great suggestion, I didn't think of this and was mainly use this readme to explain the window fifo formula.

groups can be consumed before `g`. Each train step consumes `P` groups, so the maximum age of `g` at consumption is

```text
max_offpolicy_steps = floor((B + W - 2) / P).
```

Substituting `B = (S + 1) * P`:

```text
max_offpolicy_steps
  = floor(((S + 1) * P + W - 2) / P)
  = floor(S + (P + W - 2) / P)
  = S + floor((P + W - 2) / P)
  = S + floor(((W - 1) + (P - 1)) / P)
  = S + ceil((W - 1) / P).
```

For the last equality, let `W - 1 = q * P + r`, where `0 <= r < P`. Then

```text
floor(((W - 1) + (P - 1)) / P)
  = floor((q * P + r + P - 1) / P)
  = q + floor((r + P - 1) / P).
```

If `r = 0`, the last term is `0`; if `r > 0`, it is `1`. This is exactly

```text
ceil((W - 1) / P)
  = q,     if r = 0
  = q + 1, if r > 0.
```

Thus the extra steps allowed by reordering are

```text

> max_out_of_order_steps = ceil((W - 1) / P),

Reviewer: i also think that all of these equations can be made a bit easier to digest.

Something along the lines:

"Given a window, can we calculate the worst case scenario for extra off-policiness introduced? yes!

The worst case scenario is if you stall at the last example necessary to complete a batch, i.e.:
a) You consumed prompts_per_batch-1 (just shy of completing a full train step)
b) You last example of this batch stalls
c) And you consume all of the window ahead of this example

In this case:
consumed_before = (B - 1) 
consumed_after = (W - 1)
total_consumed = consumed_before + consumed_after = B+W-2

total_extra_train_steps = total_consumed // prompts_per_step = 1+(W-2)//B

max_off_policy = target_off_policy + total_extra_train_steps = S+1+(W-2)/ B

Author: let me get rid of `max_out_of_order_steps`, I feel like we does not use it anywhere and is introducing more complexity.

max_offpolicy_steps = S + max_out_of_order_steps.
```

The ceiling matters. Under strict FIFO, the `B - 1` older groups already leave `P - 1` groups toward the next train batch. Consequently, even one younger group bypassing `g` can complete that batch and add one offpolicy step.

## Example

Let `S = 2`, `P = 3`, `B = 9`, and `W = 4`. Suppose prompt group `8` is slow while the other prompt groups are ready:

```text
Initial active buffer, sampled at policy v0:

train step 1       train step 2       partial step 3
[ 0 ][ 1 ][ 2 ]   [ 3 ][ 4 ][ 5 ]   [ 6 ][ 7 ][ 8 ] <- tracked prompt group

With W = 4, groups 9, 10, and 11 may bypass group 8:

consumed before tracked prompt group 8:
[ 0 ][ 1 ][ 2 ]   [ 3 ][ 4 ][ 5 ]   [ 6 ][ 7 ][ 9*]   [10*][11*]
      step 1             step 2             step 3         partial

> * younger prompt group that bypasses prompt group 8

Reviewer: lets move the example earlier -- before we calculate max_offpolicy_steps. Lets make sure the user understands the problem first.

also, i think that the using idx=8 as the stall case here is not too helpful. Maybe idx 1 or 2?

Feel free to grab the example from the pastebin i shared

# Windowed FIFO design

This design follows the windowed FIFO rollout scheduling described in Section 6.2.4 of the [MiniMax paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.26494).

## Strict FIFO

> The simplest scheduling policy is strict FIFO: always consume the oldest prompt group before any younger group. With `P` prompt groups per train step and a target of `S` offpolicy steps, the active buffer holds `B = (S + 1) * P` groups. Strict FIFO keeps every group within the target bound because at most `B - 1` older groups can be consumed first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The simplest scheduling policy is strict FIFO: always consume the oldest prompt group before any younger group. With `P` prompt groups per train step and a target of `S` offpolicy steps, the buffer holds `B = (S + 1) * P` groups. Strict FIFO keeps every group within the target bound because at most `B - 1` older groups can be consumed first.
```

- **Stall:** wait for the slow group and leave the trainer idle.
- **Greedy drop:** greedily train on any completed group, then drop the slow group when it becomes too old. This wastes completed rollout work and can bias which samples reach training.
- **Increase the target offpoliciness:** enlarge the active buffer so every group may wait longer. This makes all training samples older just to accommodate a small number of stragglers.

Windowed FIFO is a bounded compromise between these choices. It lets a limited number of younger groups bypass a slow group, buying extra time for that group to finish. The tradeoff is selective: a bypassed straggler may be consumed slightly older, but the configured target offpoliciness and active-buffer size are not increased for every sample.

The window remains anchored at the oldest active group. Consuming a younger group does not slide it forward, so no more than `W - 1` younger groups can bypass the oldest group before the scheduler applies backpressure again.

## Configuration

The user configures:

- `S`: target offpolicy steps (`target_offpolicy_steps`)

> - `f`: fraction of the active buffer visible to the scheduler (`window_fraction`), which defaults to `0.3` following the MiniMax paper

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `f`: fraction of the buffer visible to the scheduler (`window_fraction`), which defaults to `0.3` following the MiniMax paper
```

Given `P` prompt groups per train step, the controller derives:

```text
B = (S + 1) * P
W = max(1, floor(f * B))

> ```

Reviewer: can we spell all variables? i dont think that we gain much by using B, S, W, f, B, P. It makes it harder for the reader.

Reviewer: for example, "Let `S = 1`, `P = 3`, and `f = 0.5`, which gives `B = 6` and `W = 3`. Groups `0`, `1`, `3`, `4`, and `5` finish quickly, but group `2` is slow:"

this could be read naturally, as plain english, but because of the letters, users have to go back and read what each letter means.

Author: the symbol is introduced for easier derivation of the math proof below. For the example illustration, I expanded using natural language.

## Example

Let `S = 1`, `P = 3`, and `f = 0.5`, which gives `B = 6` and `W = 3`. Groups `0`, `1`, `3`, `4`, and `5` finish quickly, but group `2` is slow:

```text
[ 0 ready ][ 1 ready ][ 2 slow ][ 3 ready ][ 4 ready ][ 5 ready ]
```

With strict FIFO, the batcher consumes groups `0` and `1`, then stalls on group `2`. The trainer has only two of the three groups needed for a train step, so it remains idle even though younger groups are ready.

With `W = 3`, once groups `0` and `1` are consumed, the window is anchored at group `2` and covers groups `[2, 4]`:

```text
anchored window
[ 2 slow ][ 3 ready ][ 4 ready ]   [ 5 ready ]
                                      ^ blocked outside the window
```

Group `3` may bypass group `2` and complete the train batch. Group `4` may also be consumed, buying more time for group `2` to finish. Consuming either younger group does not move the anchor, so group `5` remains blocked until group `2` is consumed.

## Offpolicy bound

Given a window size `W`, we can calculate the worst-case extra offpoliciness it introduces. Consider a slow target group `g` that was admitted at the back of a full active buffer:

> 1. The trainer consumes all `B - 1` older groups ahead of `g`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The trainer consumes all `B - 1` older groups before `g`.
```

> 1. The trainer consumes all `B - 1` older groups ahead of `g`.

Reviewer: why B-1? before you were using B for buffer size "B = (S + 1) * P", but now it seems to be batch size? we should also avoid the word batch, since we use "num_prompt_per_step"

Author: B always mean buffer size. updated in the notation section.

> 2. Because `B - 1 = S * P + (P - 1)`, this completes `S` train steps and leaves the next batch one group short.

Reviewer: this formula is not obvious. Do we need it? I think that we could even delete 1,2,3 here and the doc would be fine.

Author: why `B - 1 = S * P + (P - 1)` is not obvious? `B = (S + 1) * P`

3. Group `g`, which would complete that batch, stalls.

> 4. The trainer consumes all `W - 1` younger groups that may bypass `g` before the anchored window blocks again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The trainer consumes all `W - 1` younger groups ahead of `g`within the window.
```

The worst-case ordering for a group sampled at policy version `v` is:

```text
older groups                                  younger groups
[ 0 ][ 1 ] ... [ g-1 ][ g ][ g+1 ] ... [ g+W-1 ]
                       ^    at most W-1 prompt groups can bypass g
                       target sampled at policy v
```

```text
consumed_before = B - 1
consumed_after = W - 1
total_consumed = consumed_before + consumed_after = B + W - 2
```

Each train step consumes `P` groups, so the maximum age of `g` at consumption is:

```text

> max_offpolicy_steps = (B + W - 2) // P

Reviewer: ```suggestion
extra_offpolicy_steps = (B + W - 2) // P
```

Author: we used `max_offpolicy_steps` for all the rest of places.

```

Substituting `B = (S + 1) * P` gives:

```text
max_offpolicy_steps
  = floor(((S + 1) * P + W - 2) / P)
  = floor(S + (P + W - 2) / P)
  = S + floor(((W - 1) + (P - 1)) / P)
  = S + ceil((W - 1) / P)

> ```

Reviewer: Its funny that this works, but it is also wrong.

you are doing `total_consumed = consumed_before + consumed_after = B + W - 2`

Its not B. Its P. The worst case scenario is NOT when the last prompt of the buffer stalls.
The owrst case scenario is when the last prompt of a batch P stalls.

It should be:

P+W-2

Then the formula is:

max_offpolicy_steps = target_off_polocy + extra_off_policy
= S + (P + W - 2) // P

Author: `(P+W-2)//P` is extra off policy and `(B + W - 2) // P` is max off policy steps. I don't think it's wrong, and they don't conflict.

Reviewer 2: S + (P + W - 2) // P = S + 1 + (W - 1) // P = S + 1 + floor((W - 1) / P)

but @acisseJZhong has S + ceil((W - 1) / P)

without reading the proof, one of them is wrong

Reviewer: @tianyu-l your 2nd step is wrong. You are doing -1 instead of -2.

S + 1 + (W - 2) // P = 1 + floor((W - 2) / P) == ceil((W - 1) / P)
  
  Example: W=4, P=3:
  1 + floor(2/3) = 1
  ceil(3/3)      = 1
  
  But still, the concept is a bit unnatural IMO as presented. 
  
  The worst case is when i have, for example P=8
  then i consume the 7 before me
  i stall on the 8th, and then consume the window ahead of me.
  
  So the formula is:
  extra_policy_steps = (consumed_before + consumed_ahead) // P
  max_off_policy = target_off_policy + extra_policy_steps

but the way currently presented, it says:
the worst case is when i consume the entire buffer
stall on the last example
then consume the window ahead.

max_off_policy = B-1 + W-1
  
Now i see why she called it `max_off_policy`, instead of `extra_policy_steps`, but it feels unnatural to me to frame it this way. It only works because B is a multiple of P.

Author: wdym by it only works because B is a multiple of P? I think `max_offpolicy_steps = (B + W - 2) // P = S + ceil((W - 1) / P)` holds without any constraints. This is the whole point of what the last section of the readme is trying to prove?

Author: > Its not B. Its P. The worst case scenario is NOT when the last prompt of the buffer stalls.
> The owrst case scenario is when the last prompt of a batch P stalls.

I don't agree with this. 
<img width="724" height="248" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/76bab575-ab54-431e-932b-23878bbaad69" />
see this example, worst case is that all the eight groups generated by policy 0 are in the buffer and group 7 stalls.

Reviewer: > wdym by it only works because B is a multiple of P? I think max_offpolicy_steps = (B + W - 2) // P = S + ceil((W - 1) / P) holds without any constraints.

We define `B = (S + 1)P`, so B must be a multiple of P.

For arbitrary B = qP + r:

floor((B + W - 2) / P)
= q + floor((r + W - 2) / P)

The remainder r determines how many bypasses complete the partial batch.

To the limit: Imagine the buffer is infinite, and we just drop samples when they get too old.
The logic is not about the size of buffer.

The logic, as I see it, is about:
- We consume P-1, just shy of a new train step
- Then we consume the window ahead.

In other words: Pth_example_policy_version + How many extra train steps will happen ahead of the Pth example

---

I will leave it up to you and we can revisit when we follow up with the work where we drop old samples and expand the buffer to oversample.

Author: > The logic, as I see it, is about:
> 
> We consume P-1, just shy of a new train step
> Then we consume the window ahead.

I agree with this, but this(P+W-2) is how many extra off policy steps. B+W-2 is how many max off policy steps. They don't conflict. 

I don't agree with the statement that the math works because of B is a multiple of P(although B is multiple of P in reality), if that's what you are trying to say? 

Anyways, I believe we should be on the same page now?

Author: > follow up with the work where we drop old samples 

I didn't think too much but i feel like if we drop old samples, or if enable trainer microabtch overlap, then max offpolicy steps won't be nicely derived as a formula of B and W. It will vary depends on the actual runtime behavior. Therefore the code will become very different.

Reviewer 2: @felipemello1 
> your 2nd step is wrong. You are doing -1 instead of -2.

sorry my derivation was wrong.
